AI #1896: Add marketplace multi-provider scenarios guidance (#2013)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/appendix/marketplace_multi_provider_scenarios.md

Reviewer: this text doesnt need to be underlined?

Reviewer: for consistency in the examples, perhaps lean into the Datadog example, or keep it abstract. As it stands, it could be more consistent - we half use Datadog as the example in AWS (sometimes referring to DD, sometimes referring to SaaS Provider'), but then the examples are generalized to 'SaaS Provider' for Azure & GCP.

> # Marketplace Multi-Provider Scenario Guidance

Reviewer 2: ### Title / Naming

"Marketplace Multi-Provider Scenarios" is hard to parse and doesn't follow the existing appendix naming convention (e.g., "Examples: SaaS"). I'd suggest something more direct like:

> **Examples: Marketplace Purchase and Usage Across Providers**

This immediately tells the reader what they're looking at: example data showing how FOCUS columns are populated when a marketplace purchase is billed by one provider but usage is tracked by another.

This section is non-normative.

## Overview

> In marketplace scenarios, billing data may originate from more than one provider. A Cloud Service Provider (CSP) typically handles the purchase and invoicing of a third-party software subscription, while the Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) provider independently generates usage records. Because these two data streams describe different aspects of the same commercial relationship, each provider populates a distinct subset of FOCUS columns.

Reviewer 3: i think its inaccurate to say provides a subset of focus columns. Each should provide the accurate focus data based on what they see.

This guidance clarifies how `EffectiveCost`, `BilledCost`, and related entity identification columns should be populated by each participating entity, and how practitioners can correlate records across providers in a unified FOCUS dataset.

## Provider Responsibility Matrix

> The table below summarizes which provider is responsible for populating key FOCUS columns in common marketplace scenarios.

Reviewer 3: The phrase "Populate FOCUS columns" is the wrong framing here. Ultimately, all 4 FOCUS cost metrics must be populated in all rows.

| Scenario | Purchase Provider | Usage Provider | BilledCost | EffectiveCost |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| CSP Marketplace — CSP as invoice issuer | CSP | CSP | CSP populates with invoiced amount | CSP populates based on actual usage |

> | Third-party SaaS via CSP Marketplace | CSP | SaaS Provider | CSP populates with contracted amount; SaaS Provider sets to 0 | SaaS Provider populates based on actual usage; CSP sets to 0 |

Reviewer 3: With the covering and covered concept, there's no guarantee that, especially for the usage charges, the BilledCost will be 0. You could, for example, have a covering charge that provides a discounted rate (similar to RIs - though that specific example is typically in the same entity). 

Also, CSP here would be better described as the marketplace vendor? There are many providers that have marketplaces (doesn't have to be a CSP). I don't have a good suggestion for the term to use other than "Marketplace vendor," but "CSP" seems too restrictive.

CSP populates the contracted amount; should it also/instead reference the amount to be invoiced?

| Cross-provider | CSP | SaaS Provider | Only the invoice-issuing provider populates a non-zero BilledCost | Only the provider with actual usage data populates a non-zero EffectiveCost |

## Key Principles

> When a CSP processes a marketplace purchase but does not have visibility into the SaaS provider's consumption metrics, it sets `EffectiveCost` to 0 on the purchase row. Per the `EffectiveCost` column definition, `EffectiveCost` is 0 when `ChargeCategory` is `Purchase` and the charge covers future eligible usage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a CSP processes a marketplace purchase but does not provide the consumption-based covered charges, it sets `EffectiveCost` to 0 on the purchase row. Per the `EffectiveCost` column definition, `EffectiveCost` is 0 when `ChargeCategory` is `Purchase` and the charge covers future eligible usage.
```

The SaaS provider, which has direct access to consumption data, sets `BilledCost` to 0 on its usage rows. Per the `BilledCost` column definition, `BilledCost` is 0 for charges where payment is received by a third party, such as marketplace transactions billed through a CSP. The SaaS provider populates `EffectiveCost` with the actual usage amount in its own billing records.

> Cross-provider totals for `EffectiveCost` and `BilledCost` will not reconcile to a single figure. This is expected behavior. The CSP records the contracted purchase amount in `BilledCost`; the SaaS provider records actual consumption in `EffectiveCost`. Practitioners should treat these as complementary datasets rather than summing across them directly.

Reviewer 3: Not sure what this is trying to say. Please check the effective cost definition for details on how to reconcile these two metrics and when they will differ or be the same.

## Entity Identification

> The scenario covered in this appendix maps to entity identification scenario 3.3.x in the Participating Entity Identification appendix, where a SaaS provider does not expose its hosting infrastructure through billing data. Because the customer's payment flows to the SaaS provider through the CSP, the CSP is the `InvoiceIssuerName` on both the purchase record and the SaaS usage record. The following entity columns apply to all three CSP examples below.

Reviewer 4: "Scenario 3.3.x" is ambiguous. The Participating Entity Identification appendix defines 3.3.1 (purchase records for marketplace offerings) and 3.3.2 (usage records for marketplace offerings). Both apply here.

```suggestion
The scenario covered in this appendix maps to entity identification scenarios 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 in the Participating Entity Identification appendix, where a SaaS provider does not expose its hosting infrastructure through billing data. Scenario 3.3.1 covers CSP purchase records; 3.3.2 covers SaaS usage records. Because the customer's payment flows to the SaaS provider through the CSP, the CSP is the `InvoiceIssuerName` on both the purchase record and the SaaS usage record. The following entity columns apply to all three CSP examples below.
```

| Column | CSP Purchase Row | SaaS Usage Row |
|---|---|---|
| `ServiceProviderName` | Marketplace seller (e.g., Datadog) | Marketplace seller (e.g., Datadog) |
| `InvoiceIssuerName` | CSP (e.g., Amazon Web Services) | CSP (e.g., Amazon Web Services) |
| `HostProviderName` | Marketplace seller (e.g., Datadog) | Marketplace seller (e.g., Datadog) |

`ServiceProviderName` identifies the seller of the service rather than the marketplace operator. The CSP's role as marketplace operator is reflected in `ServiceName` (e.g., "AWS Marketplace"), not in `ServiceProviderName`.

## Examples

The following examples illustrate how FOCUS columns are populated across AWS Marketplace, Azure Marketplace, and Google Cloud Marketplace when a customer procures a third-party SaaS subscription. Each scenario shows both the purchase record generated by the CSP and the usage record generated by the SaaS provider.

Full example datasets are available in the linked CSV files.

> ### AWS Marketplace

Reviewer 3: What's the important difference here between the 3 CSPs? If nothing other than the names of the cost origin entities are different, we should replace them with just one.

**AWS Marketplace — purchase record** ([full dataset](../data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_aws.csv))

| BillingAccountId | InvoiceIssuerName | ServiceProviderName | HostProviderName | ChargeCategory | ChargeFrequency | BilledCost | EffectiveCost | ServiceName | ResourceId | InvoiceId |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 123456789012 | Amazon Web Services | Datadog | Datadog | Purchase | One-Time | 10000 | 0 | AWS Marketplace | mp-sub-dd-pro-2025-04 | INV-AWS-2025-04-001 |

**Datadog — usage record** ([full dataset](../data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_datadog.csv))

| BillingAccountId | InvoiceIssuerName | ServiceProviderName | HostProviderName | ChargeCategory | ChargeFrequency | BilledCost | EffectiveCost | ServiceName | ResourceId | InvoiceId |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| dd-acct-9876543210 | Amazon Web Services | Datadog | Datadog | Usage | Usage-Based | 0 | 8245 | Datadog | mp-sub-dd-pro-2025-04 | INV-AWS-2025-04-001 |

> The contracted purchase amount recorded by AWS ($10,000) differs from the usage-based effective cost recorded by Datadog ($8,245) because the two figures represent different accounting perspectives: cash outlay at purchase versus actual consumption during the billing period. This difference is expected and does not indicate an error.

Reviewer 4: `$` breaks the PDF build. Use `&dollar;` per the pattern established in PR #1877. Note: the Datadog reference on this line will also change as part of the genericization.

```suggestion
The contracted purchase amount recorded by AWS (&dollar;10,000) differs from the usage-based effective cost recorded by Datadog (&dollar;8,245) because the two figures represent different accounting perspectives: cash outlay at purchase versus actual consumption during the billing period. This difference is expected and does not indicate an error.
```

|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| gf-acct-cloudtechdemo | Microsoft | Grafana Labs | Grafana Labs | Usage | Usage-Based | 0 | 4120 | Grafana Cloud | mp-sub-gf-pro-2025-04 | INV-AZ-2025-04-001 |

### Google Cloud Marketplace

A customer purchases an annual Datadog Pro subscription through Google Cloud Marketplace. Google records the purchase transaction and sets `EffectiveCost` to 0. Datadog records actual consumption in its own billing export, sets `BilledCost` to 0, and populates `EffectiveCost` with the usage amount. Both records carry the same `InvoiceIssuerName` (Google) and `InvoiceId`, and the shared `ResourceId` value enables correlation.

**Google Cloud Marketplace — purchase record** ([full dataset](../data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_gcp.csv))

| BillingAccountId | InvoiceIssuerName | ServiceProviderName | HostProviderName | ChargeCategory | ChargeFrequency | BilledCost | EffectiveCost | ServiceName | ResourceId | InvoiceId |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| gcp-billing-proj-001 | Google | Datadog | Datadog | Purchase | One-Time | 10000 | 0 | Google Cloud Marketplace | mp-sub-dd-pro-gcp-2025-04 | INV-GCP-2025-04-001 |

> **Datadog — usage record** ([full dataset](../data/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_m1_datadog.csv))

Reviewer 5: Something feels off here. The GCP Marketplace example seems to describe a GCP-specific Datadog usage row, but the linked file looks like the AWS Datadog example. AWS and Azure each have a purchase row and a matching usage row.

|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| dd-acct-9876543210 | Google | Datadog | Datadog | Usage | Usage-Based | 0 | 8245 | Datadog | mp-sub-dd-pro-gcp-2025-04 | INV-GCP-2025-04-001 |

## Correlating Records Across Providers

Practitioners can correlate purchase records from a CSP with usage records from a SaaS provider using identifiers that both parties populate for the same subscription:

- `ResourceId`: A marketplace subscription identifier populated by both the CSP billing export and the SaaS provider's usage records. Both parties must use the same value for correlation to succeed.
- `InvoiceId`: Because payment flows to the SaaS provider through the CSP, both the CSP purchase record and the SaaS usage record carry the CSP's `InvoiceId`. This can be used together with `ResourceId` to group all records associated with a given subscription and billing period.

Correlation may not always be fully automated. Additional metadata — such as account identifiers exchanged during subscription onboarding, or tags applied at purchase time — may be needed to reliably link records across datasets.

> ## Cross-Provider Aggregation

Reviewer 3: Really not understanding this section. These two metrics for a given covering purchase and covered usage records should equal over the purchase's charge period.

When combining FOCUS datasets from a CSP and a SaaS provider, `BilledCost` and `EffectiveCost` totals will differ across sources. This is expected. The CSP records the full contracted purchase amount as `BilledCost`; the SaaS provider records actual consumption as `EffectiveCost`. Summing across both datasets without accounting for this structural difference will produce misleading totals.

> Practitioners should report CSP and SaaS cost data in separate reporting dimensions, or implement reconciliation logic that accounts for the relationship between contracted purchase cost and usage-based effective cost before combining figures in a unified view.

Reviewer 4: Charge period granularity varies across SaaS service providers (e.g., Grafana currently supports monthly only). Practical consideration for practitioners building correlation logic.

```suggestion
Practitioners should report CSP and SaaS cost data in separate reporting dimensions, or implement reconciliation logic that accounts for the relationship between contracted purchase cost and usage-based effective cost before combining figures in a unified view.

SaaS service providers may also differ in charge period granularity. For example, some service providers report monthly aggregates while others support daily or hourly granularity. Practitioners building cross-provider correlation logic should account for granularity differences when aligning charge periods across datasets.
```

Reviewer 4: **Update:** The Grafana reference in this suggestion should also be genericized when applying. Replace with the fictional provider name (or describe generically, e.g., "some service providers report monthly aggregates").

- **Purchase Record Without Usage Details**: CSPs MUST NOT estimate EffectiveCost.
  - Rationale: Aligns with conformance requirements, where data generators MUST NOT populate EffectiveCost with estimated or made-up values when lacking actual usage/accrual information.
  - Usage: In marketplace scenarios, CSPs handle transactions but defer to SaaS providers for usage data.

### SaaS Provider Responsibilities
- **Usage Details Without Purchase Record**: EffectiveCost reflects actual usage.
  - Rationale: SaaS providers have direct access to consumption metrics.
  - Usage: Populate EffectiveCost based on service-specific data like API calls or data ingested.

### Aggregation Behavior
- **Cross-Provider Aggregations Will NOT Match**: This is expected behavior, not an error.
  - Rationale: Supports cross-cutting criteria for when aggregations will NOT match in cross-provider marketplace scenarios.
  - Usage: Practitioners should account for this in reporting and analysis.

### General Rule
- **EffectiveCost Population**: Only the provider with actual usage data should populate EffectiveCost.
  - Rationale: Ensures data accuracy and prevents double-counting or estimation errors.

> 

Reviewer 4: Non-normative sections should not use RFC 2119 keywords (MUST NOT). Also, the spec requires EffectiveCost = 0 on purchase rows, not empty.

```suggestion
- **Purchase Record Without Usage Details**: CSPs should not estimate EffectiveCost. Per `effectivecost.md`, EffectiveCost should be 0 on purchase rows where the purchase covers future usage charges.
```

Author: Thanks for that correction!

AWS Marketplace supports various [pricing models](https://aws.amazon.com/marketplace/features/software-as-a-service-saas/?trk=714fdf58-a133-47d9-93be-27aa5135d6ae&refid=d1c51987-4c21-453a-979b-d65a3e130bd1), including upfront payments, hourly rates, and annual contracts, but usage data is always sourced from the SaaS vendor. This separation ensures AWS focuses on infrastructure billing, while SaaS providers handle service-specific metrics.

#### Scenario Description
A customer purchases monitoring subscriptions (Datadog or Grafana) through AWS Marketplace. AWS handles the billing and invoicing, appearing as a line item in the [AWS Cost and Usage Report (CUR)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cur/latest/userguide/what-is-cur.html). The SaaS providers (Datadog/Grafana) provide the actual usage data separately, reflecting metrics like log ingestion, API calls, or active series.

#### FOCUS Dataset Population
- **BilledCost**: Populated by AWS with the total marketplace purchase amount (e.g., $10,000.00), including any fees or taxes.

> - **EffectiveCost**: Not populated by AWS (empty in AWS dataset); populated by Datadog in their separate dataset with actual usage-based costs.

Reviewer 4: The guidance should reflect the spec's actual requirement: EffectiveCost = 0 on purchase rows, not empty.

```suggestion
- **EffectiveCost Population**: Only the provider with actual usage data should populate EffectiveCost with a non-zero value. The purchase provider should set EffectiveCost to 0.
```

### Addressing Aggregation Mismatches

Practitioners can address mismatches through the following approaches:

1. **Correlation and Matching**: Use shared identifiers (e.g., ResourceId, ChargeId) to link purchase records from CSPs with usage records from SaaS providers. This may require custom ETL processes or third-party tools.
2. **Separate Reporting**: Report CSP and SaaS data separately, with clear labels indicating the source, to avoid misleading aggregations.
3. **Reconciliation Processes**: Implement manual or automated reconciliation workflows to account for discrepancies, such as comparing invoice totals against usage-based calculations.
4. **Provider Communication**: Contact providers for additional metadata or clarification on how their billing data relates.
5. **Documentation and Disclaimers**: Include disclaimers in reports noting that cross-provider totals may not match due to data source differences.

This guidance is supported by provider practices where CSPs handle transactions but SaaS providers deliver usage data, leading to potential mismatches in unified views.

## Validation

> This guidance has been validated with implementations from Datadog, Grafana, and Neos using the [FOCUS Validator](https://github.com/finopsfoundation/focus_validator). The CSV examples in the [Marketplace Multi-Provider Examples](/specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_multiprovider_examples.mdpp) have been tested against the FOCUS specification to ensure compliance.

Reviewer 4: The CSVs in their current state would not pass the FOCUS Validator. If validated previously, the CSVs may have been modified after validation.

```suggestion
This guidance references implementations from Datadog, Grafana, and Neos. The CSV examples in the [Marketplace Multi-Provider Examples](/specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_multiprovider_examples.mdpp) should be validated against the FOCUS specification using the [FOCUS Validator](https://github.com/finopsfoundation/focus_validator) before merging.
```

Author: Thanks, the word validation was throwing me off during first read/usage!

# Marketplace Multi-Provider Scenario Guidance

This section is non-normative.

## Overview

In multi-provider marketplace scenarios, billing data may originate from different data generators. For example, a Cloud Service Provider (CSP) might handle the purchase transaction, while a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) provider generates usage records. This guidance clarifies how FOCUS columns, particularly EffectiveCost, should be populated in such cases.

> This guidance addresses the data accuracy concerns outlined in the parent issue [FR] Clarify definitions of EffectiveCost vs BilledCost across providers [#982](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/982), which reframes the problem from "double counting" to providers populating inaccurate EffectiveCost values when lacking actual usage information. It provides scenario-based guidance for marketplace purchases as specified in Milestone 3 of #982.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This guidance addresses data accuracy concerns in multi-provider marketplace scenarios, specifically the risk of providers populating inaccurate EffectiveCost values when lacking actual usage information. It provides scenario-based guidance for marketplace purchases.
```

Spec content should not reference GitHub issues. Removed references to #982 and "Milestone 3." The guidance stands on its own.

## Provider Responsibility Matrix

| Scenario | Purchase Provider | Usage Provider | EffectiveCost Population |
|----------|-------------------|----------------|--------------------------|
| CSP Marketplace (CSP as invoice issuer) | CSP | CSP | CSP populates based on actual usage |
| Third-party SaaS via Marketplace (SaaS as usage provider) | CSP | SaaS | SaaS populates based on actual usage; CSP does not estimate |
| Cross-provider | CSP | SaaS | Only provider with actual usage data populates EffectiveCost |

## Key Principles

### CSP Responsibilities
- **Purchase Record Without Usage Details**: CSPs MUST NOT estimate EffectiveCost.
  - Rationale: Aligns with #982's conformance requirement that data generators MUST NOT populate EffectiveCost with estimated or made-up values when lacking actual usage/accrual information.

>   - Usage: In marketplace scenarios, CSPs handle transactions but defer to SaaS providers for usage data.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Purchase Record Without Usage Details**: When a CSP handles the purchase but not the usage, EffectiveCost on the purchase row is 0. Per the EffectiveCost column definition, EffectiveCost is 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase covers future eligible charges.
```

Non-normative sections should not use RFC 2119 keywords (MUST NOT). Restated as factual guidance with spec citation.

### SaaS Provider Responsibilities
- **Usage Details Without Purchase Record**: EffectiveCost reflects actual usage.
  - Rationale: SaaS providers have direct access to consumption metrics.
  - Usage: Populate EffectiveCost based on service-specific data like API calls or data ingested.

### Aggregation Behavior
- **Cross-Provider Aggregations Will NOT Match**: This is expected behavior, not an error.

>   - Rationale: Supports #982's cross-cutting criteria for when aggregations will NOT match in cross-provider marketplace scenarios.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Rationale: Cross-provider aggregations may not match when purchase and usage data come from different providers with different cost calculation methods.
```

Removed #982 reference. Restated the rationale in spec-appropriate language.

  - Usage: Practitioners should account for this in reporting and analysis.

### General Rule
- **EffectiveCost Population**: Only the provider with actual usage data should populate EffectiveCost.

>   - Rationale: Ensures data accuracy and prevents double-counting or estimation errors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **EffectiveCost Population**: Only the provider with actual usage data populates EffectiveCost with a non-zero value. The purchase provider sets EffectiveCost to 0.
```

The current text omits the purchase-side requirement. Per effectivecost.md, EffectiveCost MUST be 0 on purchase rows covering future usage.

AWS Marketplace supports various pricing models, including upfront payments, hourly rates, and annual contracts, but usage data is always sourced from the SaaS vendor. This separation ensures AWS focuses on infrastructure billing, while SaaS providers handle service-specific metrics.

#### Scenario Description
A customer purchases monitoring subscriptions (Datadog or Grafana) through AWS Marketplace. AWS handles the billing and invoicing, appearing as a line item in the AWS Cost and Usage Report (CUR). The SaaS providers (Datadog/Grafana) provide the actual usage data separately, reflecting metrics like log ingestion, API calls, or active series.

#### FOCUS Dataset Population
- **BilledCost**: Populated by AWS with the total marketplace purchase amount (e.g., $10,000.00), including any fees or taxes.

> - **EffectiveCost**: Not populated by AWS (empty in AWS dataset); populated by Datadog in their separate dataset with actual usage-based costs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **EffectiveCost**: 0 in the AWS dataset (per the EffectiveCost column definition, EffectiveCost is 0 when ChargeCategory is "Purchase" and the purchase covers future usage). Populated by Datadog in their separate dataset with actual usage-based costs.
```

Currently says "Not populated by AWS (empty in AWS dataset)." EffectiveCost is 0, not empty/null. EffectiveCost MUST NOT be null (effectivecost.md). The same pattern applies to L77 (Azure) and L101 (GCP).

These examples highlight provider-specific nuances in marketplace transactions, ensuring accurate FOCUS dataset handling.

For detailed FOCUS dataset examples illustrating these scenarios, see the [Marketplace Multi-Provider Examples](/specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_multiprovider_examples.mdpp).

## Correlation Approach for Practitioners

Practitioners can correlate data using common identifiers such as:

- **ResourceId**: Links resources across providers (e.g., AWS instance ID or Azure resource ID).
- **ChargeId**: Unique identifier for charges, useful for matching line items.
- **InvoiceId** (where available): Ties back to billing documents.

For examples, refer to the CSV datasets in [Marketplace Multi-Provider Examples](/specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_multiprovider_examples.mdpp), where ResourceId and ChargeId are populated to demonstrate correlation in multi-provider scenarios.

> Note: Correlation may require additional metadata or external systems. For more details on FOCUS columns, see the [FOCUS Column Library](https://focus.finops.org/focus-columns/). Reference the parent issue for this guidance: [FR] Clarify definitions of EffectiveCost vs BilledCost across providers [#982](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/982).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note: Correlation may require additional metadata or external systems. For more details on FOCUS columns, see the [FOCUS Column Library](https://focus.finops.org/focus-columns/).
```

Removed the "Reference the parent issue" sentence with the #982 link.

### Addressing Aggregation Mismatches

Practitioners can address mismatches through the following approaches:

1. **Correlation and Matching**: Use shared identifiers (e.g., ResourceId, ChargeId) to link purchase records from CSPs with usage records from SaaS providers. This may require custom ETL processes or third-party tools.
2. **Separate Reporting**: Report CSP and SaaS data separately, with clear labels indicating the source, to avoid misleading aggregations.
3. **Reconciliation Processes**: Implement manual or automated reconciliation workflows to account for discrepancies, such as comparing invoice totals against usage-based calculations.
4. **Provider Communication**: Contact providers for additional metadata or clarification on how their billing data relates.
5. **Documentation and Disclaimers**: Include disclaimers in reports noting that cross-provider totals may not match due to data source differences.

This guidance is supported by provider practices where CSPs handle transactions but SaaS providers deliver usage data, leading to potential mismatches in unified views.

> This guidance is supported by provider practices where CSPs handle transactions but SaaS providers deliver usage data, leading to potential mismatches in unified views.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This guidance is supported by provider practices where CSPs handle transactions but SaaS providers deliver usage data, leading to potential mismatches in unified views.
```

Removes the duplicated paragraph (identical text on consecutive lines).

## Validation

> This guidance has been validated with implementations from Datadog, Grafana, and Neos using the [FOCUS Validator](https://github.com/finopsfoundation/focus_validator). The CSV examples in the [Marketplace Multi-Provider Examples](/specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_multiprovider_examples.mdpp) have been tested against the FOCUS specification to ensure compliance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This guidance references implementations from Datadog, Grafana, and Neos. The CSV examples in the [Marketplace Multi-Provider Examples](/specification/appendix/marketplace_multiprovider_examples/marketplace_multiprovider_examples.mdpp) should be validated against the FOCUS specification using the [FOCUS Validator](https://github.com/finopsfoundation/focus_validator) before merging.
```

The CSVs would not pass the FOCUS Validator in their current state. Changed from a validation claim to a validation recommendation.

> For further details, refer to the related GitHub issue: [AI] Draft Marketplace Multi-Provider Scenario Guidance (Appendix) [#1896](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/1896). It contributes to the broader effort in [FR] Clarify definitions of EffectiveCost vs BilledCost across providers [#982](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues/982), specifically supporting Milestone 3 scenario-based guidance for marketplace purchases.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For the full FOCUS specification and column definitions, see [focus.finops.org](https://focus.finops.org).
```

Replaced GitHub issue references (#1896, #982) with a link to the spec. Spec content should not reference project management artifacts.
